our country's in trouble right now
because we're not listening we're
talking we're all we're all talking
we've got every kind of gadget
imaginable to help us to talk
but we're not listening
so we talk at each other and not to each
other it cost you your job
cost you your company
cost you your marriage
cost you your son
cost you your daughter
that's too expensive
this is not just about being a great
orator on a stage or doing a ted talk
this is
the survival techniques that you need to
sustain
the things you love about your life
will only be sustained
to what you say out of your mouth
[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i am here with the
extraordinary bishop t d jakes thank you
so much for joining me today oh tom i'm
pleased to be with you and thanks for
having me
man of course and i'm super excited to
talk about the new book don't drop the
mic a truly legendary orator stepping up
and giving the recipe as you call it for
how you do what you do i know you were
really apprehensive about writing the
book and trying to put sort of
scientific language behind it um
but the book ends up being
extraordinarily powerful in that it felt
like a sermon if i'm completely honest
it was so full of parables and stories
um
and one thing that really stuck out to
me is this idea of
the power of a man with a microphone
talk to me about that and what made you
want to write the book
you know
it started for me as a little boy born
in the hills of west virginia on the
side of a mountain
my mother was a school teacher and my
father was a janitor
uh my father ended up opening up a
business with 52 employees but he
started with the mop of the bucket
so he was working all the time he would
sell them home
and when he was home he was generally
sleep
this particular time he was awake
and the six o'clock news was on and dr
martin luther king was on
and and i kept looking at dr king
and what he was doing with the
microphone
and i kept looking at how my father was
looking at him and i don't know what she
moved me the most
uh the the admiration and gaze of my
father or the articulation
and the in-depth way in which
dr king had that cadence that cadence a
way of speaking
you know that that mesmerized the
country even people who didn't agree
with him had to listen at him because he
was such a tremendous orator
at that point it planted the first seed
of the power of a microphone and and and
i mean that literally but also
figuratively the power of a platform in
general and understanding the dynamics
of the breadth of that platform and how
more things have happened
when you think of mahatma gandhi when
you think of nelson mandela when you
think of
uh people down throughout the ages that
have changed the world
more things have changed with the mic
than have with the gun
and i think it's so important for us
yeah you know and and while we
deliberate about guns and gun rights and
what has really changed the world the
most
was an unrelenting welding of the
microphone
and if we have one if we have a platform
of any kind
and and we understand the power of that
platform we have the power to change the
world and i wanted to start from there
and and talk about communication in
every aspect not just
from comedians to litigators to
preachers to exegeting a text to trying
to communicate with your wife you know
you know uh we say communication is
critical for marriage but nobody tells
you how to do it and nobody tells you
how to do it
understanding the audience
and that the rules change as the
audience varies
and uh and and that the art of being an
effective communicator is predicated in
part on your ability
to translate your thought into the
language that your audience understands
whether it is in poland or
australia or in washington or sitting
across the dinner table from your wife
or in an interview
and so don't drop the mic really started
out from that perspective
and then grew out from there
all right i definitely want to get into
um i feel like an alternate title of
your book could have been true
communication and we will get into that
um but we're i want to stick with this
idea of the power of a person with a
microphone or a platform in today's
vernacular um were there i can't get
this verified i have heard that there is
a chinese curse if you will where they
say may you live in interesting times
and it is meant to be this unnerving
thing that you would wish for somebody
um
and we're all living through interesting
times right now i think that that can be
said without a shadow of a doubt
and
this idea of you creating a book that
comes along right at a moment where
certainly not in recent memory has there
been something has there been a moment
so in need of people that know how to
wield a platform and know how to
um
lead people to something extraordinary
and
i'm gonna put words in your mouth you
tell me if these are accurate um so i'm
not a religious person at all but when i
was
researching you it's sort of inevitable
that i spent many many many hours
listening to your sermons
and
it feels like
spiritually exactly the same thing i'm
trying to do where you're using god i'm
using biology and so i really felt this
deep kinship with somebody that it
surprised me a little how much i was
like getting the chills i'm like oh my
god like this guy's really onto
something like this is so powerful
so how do people
get to the point where they have
something to say
i think that
uh we all have something to say
the struggle is
find figuring out how to say it
uh
you have to be emotionally safe
in order to
add vernacular to feelings
and and when we speak out we ventilate
the soul
the the mind
the memories the past
and to be able to give verbiage to that
is very therapeutic if you go to a
therapist one of the things you'll have
you doing is journaling journaling is
getting out of you what's down inside of
you and so i think we all have something
to offer but we don't always get it out
and if you don't get it out it turns and
eats you up on the inside
and i think we have something to say
uh whether it is you can't live life and
not gather experiences and out of those
experiences come conclusions
and to share those conclusions is to
create growth the more you give away the
more you get back
give and it shall be given unto you
again
and so uh in the cross-pollination of
people talking and what to be honest
with you as i wrote the book
the pandemic hit uh
something i'd never imagined in all of
my life uh the racial tensions broke out
something that was like uh
uh reminiscent of the 60s when i was
born in 57 so i grew up in the 60s the
vietnam war and woodstock and jimi
hendrix and all of that era
and here we are back there again
and everybody's communicating and
talking at each other
but not to each other the difference
however is now
we have the ability
to
to to hunker down into the silos of our
choice
and only interact with people who think
like us dress like us and feel like us
and as we become more tribalistic
we become more animalistic and the
challenge became in the book and don't
drop the bike is that we have to keep
talking to each other it's very
appropriate that you're a person not of
faith i'm a person of faith we need to
talk to each other because you found out
we had more in common than we did apart
that's true of everything that's true
with a wife that's true with a life
that's true uh across races
that's true with all of humanity but we
allow ourselves to live behind the walls
of the labels we put on ourselves
and deny ourselves of the great
opportunity that comes from
cross-pollination and particularly
in this country
which is becoming increasingly more and
more cosmopolitan you can either use
that to horrify you and drive you
further into seclusion or you can come
out of your cave
and risk talking to somebody and
learning something new or eating
something new
or tasting something new
or wearing something new and become a
much more interesting person
uh one final thought
nature teaches us
that no fruit is born without
cross-pollination
and and and we must think about that as
humans
that if we don't cross pollinate one
with the other
uh
we won't be as fruitful as we would have
been
had we
had the courage and i do think it takes
courage to come out of your bubble
and and and talk and listen and learn
and not always show up as a teacher
but to come into the room as a student
yeah that was something that came across
loud and clear in your book we were
talking about that briefly before we
started rolling and i thought it's so
smart this idea of if you want to become
a great speaker you must first learn to
become a great listener what are some of
the um tenets of that like how do you
become a better listener
if you think about it first naturally
and then spiritually
if you lose your ability to hear
eventually it will affect your ability
to speak
because there is a correlation between
what the ear hears and what the mouth
articulates
on the impetus of that ideology comes
this tremendous premise
of listening every great orator
is a great listener
and i think we have lost not our ability
to speak
not yet
but we have lost our ability to listen
because the only thing we do is pause
while we formulate our next approach to
attack
okay
and and that's not listening
uh that's strategizing
but if we actually take the time to
listen
most of us all want the same things
most of us want to be loved
most of us want to be appreciated
most of us want to be accepted flaws at
all
most of us if we have children want
what's best for our children
most of us are scared
most of us are anxious and i'm worried
why can't we be friends
why can't we communicate
we're better together than we are apart
and we don't have to agree about
everything but in the process of meeting
i found it's hard to hate somebody you
understand
and in the process of meeting
your perspectives broaden
sometimes to the point that you are
ejected from the tribe
because people who are not exposed
are intimidated by people who are
exposed
the people who are exposed it's worth it
to lose the sanctity
of your citizenship and the tribe of how
you describe yourself
to enter into the broader world of a
human experience before you die i would
hate to die
in a zip code having never left the
neighborhood that i was born in mentally
and not experienced
the world
france
and ethiopia and
australia and millennials and boomers
and gen xers there's something to be
learned and people of faith and
people not of faith we we need to
communicate to survive as a species
and i want to drive this point a little
bit deeper if you're going to be
successful in business today
you cannot build your business
around people like you
you have to build your business in a
very broad
eclectic way
because the world is becoming broad and
eclectic
and a narrow mind also causes you to be
less successful at the end of your
career because you're niche market
marketing an item that could have a
broad appeal
if you didn't think
within the prison
of your own experiences
wow within the prison of your own
experiences that's that is a really
eloquent way to say that idea
but i want to go back to what you said
because i think this is part of what
traps people so um i don't know how much
you know about my background but i
worked in the inner cities a lot and so
i've dealt with people
that are
so bright smarter than me more
entrepreneurial than me i've heard you
talk about drug dealers in the same way
i do which is they are like
entrepreneurs but they don't understand
that essentially their product is risk
and so they've they've taken this
category of good that they're you know
selling but they have to deal with
employees profit loss i mean it's crazy
so anyway i'm dealing with these people
some of whom are smarter than me uh have
more entrepreneurial experience than me
but they're not going anywhere because
they don't have the right frame of
reference so i go to these guys i'm like
look you guys are killing yourselves to
help me build this business i'm gonna
return i will teach you anything you
want to know about entrepreneurship
anything i'll teach you how to build a
competitive company whatever like i want
to make sure you're getting as much out
of this as i am and so i would go in
early stay late whatever trying to build
these relationships
and i would get them turned on to books
and so there was this one kid grew up in
the hood his whole life drug dealer and
he got in a fist fight
over the fact that he was now reading
and people were like you've changed
and i remember that was so foreign and
so bizarre to me that he would have to
fist fight with his friends over the
fact that he was now reading books
and
that being ostracized losing your
citizenship as you called it
that's hard to overcome how do people
lean into that courage that you talked
about how do they find it within
themselves what is the reward that
awaits them if they do it in underserved
communities
we have not marketed being smart as
being cool
and anything that's not marketed is not
going to be purchased that's one thing
the other thing is i don't think that
inner city kids
don't know
they don't
that some of it is said they don't know
but some of it is that
they don't have access to capital
they have not experienced any world
other than their own
they feel isolated into the broader
community
so you develop a subculture and that
subculture becomes your reality and
hence it becomes your world and out of
it was born not only drug dealing
hip-hop
which went around the world is a prime
example of something that was born in
the hood so when you start talking about
people having something to say
if if i can start
doing hip-hop in my garage
and end up with people in switzerland
listening at beats
then that proves the fact that everybody
has something to offer that crosses
culture
barriers of all descriptions
if we would mentor each other
by
you being a part of the general populace
you become a gateway into a world that
he would never have
but by the same token if you were taken
out of your world
and had to go live in his world he would
have to teach you how to do it
so we need people who mentor us into the
next dimension of our lives regardless
of our perspectives or our backgrounds
and understanding that
embracing that and resisting the
gravitational pull
to
condescend
to what is acceptable by a few
and miss the broader populace of
entering into the mainstream of
possibilities and die
beneath your potential
it's a tragedy
a mammoth proportion because you're not
just burying the person you're bearing
the potential and a lot of people black
white brown rich poor
uh listening at us right now
run the risk of dying the death
of being normal or average rather than
being exceptional and being fruitful to
the full extent of your potential
wherever that takes you
it's not about necessarily being rich
it's about being fulfilled
or filled full
to the fullest of the highest expression
of yourself
and so i think that that's something
important it's frustrating no matter
where you park your car and no matter
the square footage of your home to pull
into the driveway or the carport or
or the sidewalk
and feel like
i never got to be
as far as i could see
and and i think we need people
to stimulate us and i wrote don't drop
the bike
in part to challenge people to keep
wrestling with this and talking about
this and doing what you did talking to
people out of your circle
uh i tell ceos you can't just build
products for people who are like you
you have to build products for everybody
you have to have everybody on your board
because you will innocently offend
somebody
and spend more money in damage control
then it would cost you to hire somebody
who would say
oh no don't make that t-shirt because in
my culture that same word means such a
such a thing and in the book i talk
about uh
i did it myself i inadvertently offended
the kenyans and uh i used a term that
over here
doesn't isn't isn't a negative term but
over there i got three days
of of being cursed out in swahili
you know
and i thought
i never even meant to do that i had a
choice at that point to either withdraw
and not talk to them anymore
or to say i got that wrong
that's not my heart
i am so sorry i offended you i
absolutely adore you and and and show me
a better term
and i handled it that way and i'm
telling you in these hard conversations
we're having in america right now
we have to keep talking even though
we're uncomfortable and even though we
get blow back and even though we get the
pool where
you're gonna be disowned by your fellow
citizens
don't stop because somebody says
you don't belong over there
don't drop the mic because destiny
is in front of you
and history
is behind you and why would you live in
your history when you can excel at your
destiny
yeah that's such a powerful idea so
you started for 10 years you were
preaching to less than 100 people which
i think is such a powerful part of your
story because people see the after photo
now with the mega church and just the
you know insane success
uh
but you said until people learn to honor
and invest in the 40 they'll never get
to the 40 000. now on that journey i
have to imagine that uh people came
after you told you you weren't good
enough you're not the right person you
shouldn't be doing this wrong message
whatever
how did you
stay focused develop the courage to
handle the slings and arrows of that
kind of climb
because i think that people today the
temptation of course is to stop when the
world slaps you hard enough and says you
know we don't want you to succeed
uh most people do stop
so what is it that you learned that
would be useful to other people on the
come up oh that's a good question
that's a good question kudos uh first of
all
i found out it is not what they say
about you that limits you the most
it's that you might believe them
and start saying that to yourself
and and uh there were many many many
people
who said that i would never
be anything
uh
i just chose not to be one of them
yeah
and as long as it's not your mouth that
says it
you can overcome theirs
all day long
the the thing that's interesting about
me was
even as a a man of the cloth and and as
a pastor and as a mega church leader
most people describe me that way because
that's how they met me uh as we speak
i've got two films coming out on
lifetime
uh i've done five movies with sony
uh grossing 500 million dollars at the
box office
through a for for-profit company i've
written 40 books 10 of them have been on
the new york times bestsellers list
don't
what i'm getting at i'm not bragging i'm
going to make a point
don't let people describe you because if
they do they will incarcerate you and
it's all right to say he's a preacher
but if you put a period
where i believe god put a comma
you limit me down to how you understand
me
i'm a person
and and a person has more than one gift
more than one talent
more than one pursuit
and and and if you've got a great job
that's good but there's more in you than
what you do
and to explore
all of the possibilities and all the
potential i opened up a foundation i
opened up a real estate ventures company
we're doing community development
we're doing uh mixed income community
development with some mixed-use uh
development in opportunity zones in
underserved communities
do everything
do everything and do it scared
because you're gonna be scared every
time you get out of your comfort zone it
is horrifying
but it is also titillating and it is
also inspiring
and it is also nerve-wracking
but you are never more alive than when
you're outside of your normal
your
your your
glands secrete different types of
hormones when you're outside of your
normal
your brain starts spinning your blood
starts rushing your adrenaline increases
most of us are dying of boredom
there are people listening at me right
now
who who drive home and circle the block
two or three times before going in the
house
we're we're dying of routine
[Music]
and we were made to be adventurous
we don't roar like the lion
you know we we don't we don't move like
the jackal
uh
we don't we don't we don't move we don't
slither like the snake uh we don't bite
like a viper
our only
weapon
that's been given to us is our brain
and we're the only species on earth that
has developed languages
and written languages and spoken
languages and read languages and built
buildings and built ships and you you
don't see ants anywhere driving around
in automobiles
you know our brain is our weapon and
when your brain
gets locked down
to living within the confinements of
other people's expectations
it starts to wither
it ceases to be
uh i i had a therapist tell me one time
your body will do everything that it did
when it was a baby the reason you can't
do it as you get older is that you stop
doing it
and so when i say don't drop the mic i
guess i'm kind of saying don't stop
doing it
keep keep moving into awkward positions
because you're if you do
if you don't do that your body will
freeze to the level of its usage that's
true of their brain too that's true of
your innovation that's true of your
creativity so when i'm talking about
don't drop the mic
get scared sometimes get where you're
not the boss get where you're walk into
a room where you're not the teacher
walk into a place where you don't know
the rules because then you become
broader and you become more interesting
and you become uh
more global and more usable in diverse
circumstances and situations the way
that i talk on sunday morning as you
know
would not be the way that i talk in an
interview would not be the way that i
would get uh
uh on larry king or whoever it is uh
bloomberg report
but i would go all those places i spoke
for the senate
i spoke for the white house
i spoke for nine heads of state around
the world
don't let people limit you
to what they think is appropriate for
you
do everything that you are gifted enough
to do now there are some things i will
never do
i will probably never conduct a symphony
you know
i won't i made straight a's in music
theory and i love music but i probably
would never conduct a symphony
but whatever is in your inventory
is all you can produce
and so uh the book is encouraging you to
explore
yourself
explore your world
and to articulate
to your audience not just understanding
your text
but also understanding your audience
because your audience is different and
you cannot be a great communicator if
you only understand your material but
you don't make it relative to your
audience connecting
is it's the art of the game
communication is about connecting
with other people and in order to do
that
you have to listen
learn
and understand
that your preferences
culture
ideas and concepts are not the only ones
on the planet
and if you're going to be effective at
reaching more people
you have to be broad enough to at least
embrace
the the notion
of how they hear
what you are saying there's a big
difference between what you intend to
communicate and what is heard and the
only thing that matters is what is heard
how do you get better at that
i think a great sentence to ask
it's after you say something what is to
ask the other person
trusted person
what did you hear out of what i said
you'd be shocked
the difference between what you said
and what they heard
and if you don't believe that get
married
all you got to do is get married three
months and you will quickly find out
that that you are angry with each other
over something that i never intended
but what she heard versus what i said
were two different things and you
struggled
to to communicate
with this person who thinks differently
and after a while
the only way the relationship survives
is if you learn
her language
and learn to communicate in a language
that she understands which in the book i
talk about being bilingual and i'm not
just talking about learning other
languages i'm talking about learning the
language of the hearer
so that you're not turned off
by somebody who's really crying out for
help
i had a guy send me a note uh on
instagram and i mean he like he let me
have it he just cuts me out said all
kind of stuff you know and and i'm an
easygoing guy but there is another
person sitting in here so my first
instinct was to come right back at him
and not curse him out but let him have
it you know you don't understand me da
and some said wait a minute you're not
listening
he's cursing because that's how he
communicates
if he were ordinary hamburger he would
curse
he that's how he communicates
he's really asking you for help
but you can't hear it
and when i heard it
that way
i realized that he wasn't attacking me
he was attacking being stuck where he
was
and he didn't think i could relate to it
and it was really a cry for help and i
think our country's in trouble right now
because we're not listening we're
talking we're all we're all talking
we've got every kind of gadget
imaginable to help us to talk
but we're not listening
so we talk at each other and not to each
other costs you your job
costs you your company
cost you your marriage
cost you your son
cost you your daughter
that's too expensive
this is not just about being a great
orator on a stage or doing a ted talk
this is
the survival techniques that you need to
sustain
the things you love about your life
will only be sustained
through what you say out of your mouth
wow you
have an uncanny ability to understand
other people i saw an interview you did
with your daughter which i thought was
really powerful
and
you were going back and forth between
you know look guys are like this and
women are like this and
being able to bridge the two is
incredibly important and i thought that
the breakdown of the different sort of
archetypes and look you're
you're very careful to say nobody's
monolithic it's not all guys are exactly
the same all women are exactly the same
races are exactly the same so we'll
we'll set that aside but there are
certainly
archetypes within those that are very
powerful to understand and i'm curious
to know is it just through the
interaction with your congregation over
40 plus years that you've come to have
that deep understanding or is there a
way that people can learn it
without having access to the kind of
people and intimacy that you have access
to
you know i became a great counselor when
i became a great listener
and uh it's not so much what you do on
stage but counseling couples
will teach you to be a great translator
you know she's not saying that what
she's really saying is you know and and
i found myself
like i was at the united nations
translating between two people who live
together they live together they sleep
together they have sex together they
make babies together but they don't talk
together
and a lot of times
they that's why divorce is so painful
because sometimes you divorce
over what you didn't understand
not because you didn't care
and it's very it's a slow painful death
that takes longer than it does for the
ink to dry it's going to go on for a
long time
because you often walked away from
somebody who had what you needed but
they didn't know how to give it
or didn't understand that you needed it
and and i've watched this happen so much
that after you bury enough relationships
and bury enough people and then you have
to realize that i see people
when life gets serious when a baby's
born uh when somebody's dying
of covied when when somebody's about to
get married or somebody's about to get
buried and there's something about those
types of situations where people get
real
so i don't meet your pretender your
ambassador your representative your
facade your camouflage i get to meet you
when you're raw
and that helps a lot so you don't have
to necessarily go out here and be a
preacher to do this
but when people are raw don't run
most of us when somebody's really
hurting or somebody died or or they're
going through a divorce we run
don't run from them run into them
and and and don't come to fix him
just to listen
because the best thing you can do as a
friend is to listen and i guarantee you
your words of encouragement will be
helpful and whatever you do will be nice
but you will leave with more than what
you gave
because you will learn something about
the human experience that you can use
over and over again and that will help
you with your own pathology
and your own issues uh because
we're not far removed from each other
not nearly as far removed as the press
would have us think
we live in a polarized society where i
didn't come up in that way we had the
six o'clock news
everybody heard the same news
everybody was exposed to the same truth
we might have had different opinions
about it but we had one centralized
feeding station now you can get news in
your flavor
it's like baskin robbins you know so so
you can get news uh you don't like rocky
road come on over here get some of this
strawberry and then the worst part about
it is
then you think that that strawberry is
absolute
and because we have 24 hour news cycles
because we build a world
that uh
technology begins to follow you and
through algorithms uh associates you
with your interests it starts pushing to
you information that further supports
whatever you were googling about until
after a while this false reality like
the whole world thinks this way and then
when you get out there and and and
you're not and the cookies aren't
directing certain things to you and you
run into the real world you're a gas how
could you think that you know look at
how many things we have created to
divide us
and how few things we have created to
unite us and communication
actually unites us so when i say don't
drop the mic
if women had dropped the mic they
wouldn't have had the right to vote
if dr king had dropped the mic we would
still uh be be living up under jim crow
uh if abraham lincoln had brought the
mic we would still be in slavery you
know look at all the times that somebody
saying something
changed our reality and our perception
of normal
now that's so important
i want to stick on this theme of
translating for people there's you
really go into depth about this nuance
that i think is important and one of the
things that you called out is
um
it may be someone that you know and
understand well they think like you but
you're in a different season than they
are
and uh you gave a pretty powerful
example of you could be talking to
somebody who's as devout as you are
and
you you don't want to hear about god in
that moment because that's not the
season that you're in and when you've
got two people
explain that to us this idea of seasons
and how even that can create
misunderstandings oh i'm a completely
different person from 40 years ago
you know uh i'm you you when you're
i'm i'm the i have the same dna i have
the same fingerprint i have the same
voice print but i don't have the same
experiences so at any particular moment
it's not can you go with me as can you
grow with me
and so at any particular moment where we
may have shared philosophies
the season will change the reality
you know right now i'm sitting in dallas
and it's 80 degrees outside
a month ago it was below zero
though i'm in the same place it's
different based on the season i'm in
and understanding that and this is
important i think this is really
important especially uh for men but
maybe for women too
we keep trying
to hold on to our last season
without discovering the beauty of the
season we're in now
we we are we we're
we're in the gym we're running we're
doing everything we can to hold on to
20.
as if something were wrong with 40
instead of exploring 40 and and re
pivoting
is the word pivoting into the beauty of
four there's a beauty at
if you sit down and talk to a 80 year
old man who is happy there are things
that he's happy about that a 20 year old
man hadn't even touched yet
he doesn't even have a clue
he doesn't even know that exists yet and
so seasons stages and ages have
repercussions on how we get along and so
we are constantly in motion we are
constantly evolving we are constantly
becoming and we must not despise
that transition
because number one it's inevitable it's
going to happen anyway
and number two
you will miss the beauty
of of of wrinkles
of of gray hair
of of love to to wrinkled eyes
you will botox your way into
missing what the beauty that comes
to be a grandmother that there's a
beauty and a charm and a finesse and a
wisdom but we are so obsessed with what
was and i think that it's something to
be said
if you are leading and if you are living
we have to deal with cross-generational
realities even though we might all be
people of faith or we might all be
atheists or agnostics or whatever we are
we're at different stages of life
putting yourself in fouls where you
describe yourself this way or that way
is a limiting idea
because i'm a person of faith does not
mean that i don't have moments of doubt
uh
because you're a person of doubt does
not mean you don't have moments of faith
it took faith to sit down in that chair
you didn't look up under it to be sure
it would hold you up you just plopped
yourself down in it believing it would
hold you up you cannot exist without
faith it's impossible not to have faith
you know you don't send somebody out to
see if your car will start before you
jump in it and so
we're not that far removed
from from one thing or the other but
once we learn a label and we teach what
that label means
now we're trying to live up to being in
that label and you might be at a
different stage
where your soul opens up to an idea that
you never thought you never thought you
could listen and a black guy from dallas
uh who's twice your size ball-headed
gray-haired
preaching
and get something out of it that's what
the book is about keep talking till
somebody listens
keep singing until somebody claps
keep painting until somebody stares you
have a gift and don't lock it up inside
the convenience of a small group of
people
all right so let's talk about building
those gifts you have an idea that i man
when i say it gave me the chills i wrote
it down i was like this is
amazing
and it is
everybody is praying for a table
but god doesn't make tables he makes
trees and the rest is up to us i was
like oh my god that's so good so how
much you know when you think about
people actually making something of
their gift doing something in the world
living through this interesting time
trying to unite people bring them
together finding their voice leveraging
their voice like what is that
i mean maybe responsibility is not the
right word but
what how do you get people to to
build the tables
first of all you have to recognize you
have a tree and stare at the tree till
you look at what it could be
it's much like raising a child you look
at a child you look what he could be
what she could be
uh and and then then finding out what
your responsibility is
to take what you have been given and
turn it into something that it was not
when it was originally handed it to you
you know and to shape that and mold it
and sand it
and and nail it and glue it and put it
together and work with it that's the
work of men
but that process sounds hard
that process sounds hard it it it isn't
hard it's creative
it's innovative
uh
it's mastering something it's
it's miraculous
it's
it's it's it does require an investment
and it doesn't require commitment
especially when you come up in an age
that everything is controlled by a
button process sounds hard
but the best things in life require
process
and if you run from the process
you alleviate the promise
in order to get to the promise you have
to go through the process and in the in
in the process of going through all of
that
guess who gets the most it's not the
table or the tree
it's the person who shaped it because
you say
oh i could i didn't know i could do that
maybe i can make a chair
maybe i could make an automobile without
what i'm talking about
we wouldn't have airplanes
you know we we
we wouldn't have spaceships we wouldn't
have television we wouldn't have we
wouldn't be zooming we wouldn't be
communicating like we're doing right now
through all of the various if somebody
hadn't taken what they were given and
making something more out of it
everybody listening in us right now has
been given things that if you can either
leave them as trees
and sit up under them and drink lemonade
or you can say
i could make a house out of this
our forefathers
took trees and built houses and chairs
and tables we cannot be the generation
that suddenly says that sounds hard
and we stop being innovative and we stop
being creative because if we do that we
will lose respect for ourselves
because we didn't make a difference
and we left it as a tree
man i wasn't sure where you were going
to go with we will lose like where the
respect was going to be lost but
pointing it at ourselves that that to me
rings so true
and getting people to understand that
look you have two phrases that you use
which give me the chills i think they're
so powerful get ready and pick up the
pace
and
hearing you repeat those from the stage
is so moving to me because look i don't
want it to be hard either i i want
abundance just to rain from the sky but
for whatever reason we have to shape the
table we have to build the stuff we have
to go through the process we have to put
in work to respect ourselves like it's
not about anybody else like if you want
to
be enamored with you
you've got to do this stuff such as the
nature of the human experience i want to
deal with both phrases part of writing
don't drop the mic was to say to the
next generation
you're not next year now
the the the fathers and mothers
that built all of that amazing things
that this country this world this
society are dying
you can't run around with your thumb in
your mouth saying
i don't know what i want to be it could
be this it could be that no you it it's
not optional
you you have to you have to get ready
because the time is now and and i could
not have written this book until i got
in my 60s
uh
yeah i couldn't have written it until i
got about 60. i i was 40 on monday
and i was 60 on tuesday
i don't it happened so fast it was
frightening and the reason i'm yelling
back at you and saying hurry up is
because while we're talking your hair is
graying
while we're talking
calcium is gathering in your bones
developing arthritis you're going to
blink
you're going to blink and this precious
commodity that all you've ever known is
youth is going to be gone
and you have to and the comfort of
getting old is not wasting your youth
and and the the power of being a father
is to tell your son
friend
do it now
go for it go after it right now
because tomorrow
you'll be in another season
and you will only eat in that season
what you plowed in this season
and so when i pass the mic
to the next generation
i'm telling them this is not a rehearsal
this is your recital
so when you hit the piano
give it hell
because
everybody's listening right now and i
don't think
that we always tell the next generation
how much it cost and how little time you
have
and and how important it is that you
don't spend
your life
crying about how you feel
and and who wasn't there and who didn't
do this or that if you you don't have
time
to allow that that that pull to pull you
back down
backwards
you have to be looking forward building
forward thinking forward going ahead
looking at your trees
sizing up what kind of table you're
going to make is it going to be round or
square what tools do you need what
relationships do you need the currency
of relationships
is your greatest resource
it's better than any dollar amount in
the world
you can have all the money in the world
you have no relationships you're a poor
man
if you have all the relationships in the
world you don't need any money
because everything you need will come
through your relationships we have not
been taught to value the currency
of human resources
relationships because everything you're
going to be
is in is is incubated in the cocoon of
who you're around
and so
being able to have those conversations
and interact with them this is my way of
doing a legacy book
to say who's up to bat now
you know
swing that thing with all you got
and run like everybody's chasing you
because this counts
this matters you will never
have this moment again not with your
children
not with your wife they may be there but
not in the same way they are in this
season you get it oh yes yeah no i think
that's incredibly powerful and to me it
ties into this idea that your dad
started with a bucket and a mop and
ended up with 52 employees but it
started with a bucket and a mop right
talk to me about work ethic and about
you you said i'll paraphrase this isn't
the exact quote but you said don't beg
anybody for anything go out and create
it yourself and i thought oh my god like
that's so good like even even in the
face of um
like there there are people and i don't
just mean it at a societal level at an
individual level that have suffered true
injustice abuse being abused i mean just
like horrendous horrendous things
and my question then is like that
sucks i i am
horrified beyond all measure that
they've had to go through that but now
what like you've got
more life you've got light to give you
know what i mean and so this is your
bucket in a mop moment and what do you
tell people at that point
your future is never predicated on what
you lost it's predicated on what you
have left
if you spend all your time in doing
inventory on what you lost you will
never count up what you have left
what you have left is enough
to build something greater than where
you are
and you have all the rich experiences
that come through the atrocities you
survived
you're stronger
you're wiser
you've proven things to yourself that
you couldn't have learned any other way
that you could overcome everything that
happened to you
gives you confidence that you know if
you went through all of those things
that you said really sucks then you know
this interview is not going to kill me
so you can walk into that door with
confidence and say good morning mr
shelton how are you today
my name is pauline you you can do it
with confidence because this can't be
any worse than that
so so start looking ahead nobody drives
forward looking in the rearview mirror
and so understanding that and and
surging ahead with what you have been
given
this gif see the other thing that that
that that i didn't share
my father was dying
and and i was raised by a dying man and
and and one of his greatest gifts to me
was to appreciate time he had a work
ethic that was incredible i have a work
ethic that that's that they say is
exemplary i mean i can hang with the
best of them when it comes to doing what
has to be done but i i got it from
watching my father
well and then sick
he kept going he kept moving he kept
producing all the way out you know and
and i intend to do that too in some way
in some capacity and
and it ceases to be
work ceases to be work when you start to
love it
when you love what you do when you love
what you do you'll never work a day in
your life
so you you love it that doesn't mean you
don't get tired that doesn't mean you
shouldn't take vacations that don't mean
you should have self-care all that but
self-care you're gonna only have so much
after a while you know you get tired of
that saying on your back you say okay i
gotta i gotta do something because we
were made to be productive and creative
and resourceful and and i i want to tell
every entrepreneur listening at me
if at first you don't succeed try try
again
and if you don't succeed that time try
try again and if you don't succeed that
time try try again and if you don't
succeed that time write a book about
what you learn from how you feel
you know
there's always something to do
with what you have experienced
yes
all right so
you've written this book it's meant to
be a legacy book what exactly do you
want your legacy to be you've done so
much films entrepreneurship multiple
companies you've got non not-for-profit
for-profit international relations
advising presidents i mean it's crazy
crazy what you've accomplished
what what is the legacy what do you want
people to take away from the fact that
you were on this earth
my legacy is you
my legacy is the people that are
listening to me
my legacy is pouring whatever i
experienced into who's listening
that is that is my legacy that's proof
that i was here if if if at the end of
this interview
and the end of reading my book
i added something to your life
that made you build a table out of a
tree
then i built it too
then whenever anybody asks you about the
table you'll tell them about this guy
you met and interviewed you know that
that's how we have survived for
centuries
that's how my people withstood slavery
and the atrocities of our lives
because in the midst of all of the
horrendous things we experienced we
still clapped our hands and we still
sang our songs and we still manage to be
creative and we are still here
so so don't tell me about trouble
through to hang the nooses and rapes and
burnings and killings
we sang
and and my legacy
is is that you dance
and sing
and survive
and and do something i'm not saying that
you won't have opposition and trouble
and tears i don't have to write about
that that will find you on its own
agony will always find you on its own
it's ecstasy that has to be has to have
your address on it so i'm sending you
the potential
to to go beyond agony to the ecstasy of
fulfilling everything you were created
to be and that's my legacy it's in the
people that heard me and read my books
and saw my movies and traveled around
the world with me uh it's in my children
uh
when i'm writing i'm actually imagining
that i'm having this conversation and my
book reads like i'm talking
uh like i'm talking to you and you know
that from reading it it sounds like
we're having a conversation with a
friend i'm actually talking to you
i'm
through the book
i didn't drop the mic and don't you drop
it either and something of what i said
will make it into your book
and something of what you said will make
it into the book of the person who read
it and that's how we have progressed for
centuries
and eons and millenniums
because
we passed the mic we didn't drop it
all right that was good i like that
cool well for the person that wants to
pick up the mic from you where can they
connect with you uh obviously they can
go see the church in dallas but what
what digital way can they reach you i'm
easy to find i'm everywhere
you know i'm i'm i'm i'm i'm in the
theater i'm i'm on television i'm i'm
i'm everywhere they can go to tdjs.org
uh they can find my books in any
bookstore
around the country amazon barnes and
nobles books a million anywhere like
that uh as long as
if if you can't find me i died
because as long as i'm living
i am going to make some noise if it's
from a bedpan if it's from a nursing
home i am going to be fruitful as long
as i
can move and uh i welcome anybody from
any stripe and any walk of life uh i'm
on instagram uh at bishop jakes
i'm on twitter at bishop jake's you know
you you can't miss me i'm everywhere
except tick tock i haven't gotten on
tick-tock yet i can't figure out what
that's about but everything else you
know
you're doing a little password but
anyway uh you know if i figure out
something to do with that i'll do that
too but i'm on social media i am on
every technological device you can
imagine and i do have daily christian
television shows i'm everywhere and
whether you're a person of faith or not
come check me out follow me you don't
have you don't you don't have to agree
with me
but i bet you you'll get something that
will help you
i will second that aggressively
awesome well bishop thank you so much
for joining me today this was really
amazing and i thoroughly enjoyed my time
researching you and reading the book
uh i recommend both highly
all right guys speaking of things that i
recommend if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
the speaking industry has been hijacked
by people who speak
to sell and it's it's okay to do that
and make money i speak to change lives
because somebody spoke
and changed my life so this is my
passion